tidyselect 1.2.0 (#600)
tidyverse/tidyverse.org: content/blog/tidyselect-1-2-0/index.Rmd

---
output: hugodown::hugo_document

slug: tidyselect-1-2-0
title: tidyselect 1.2.0
date: 2022-10-14
author: Lionel Henry and Hadley Wickham
description: >

>     [tidyselect](https://tidyselect.r-lib.org/) 1.2.0 hit CRAN last week and includes a few updates to the syntax of selections in tidyverse functions

Author: oh the link comes from the template created by `hugodown::use_tidy_post()`.

>     [tidyselect](https://tidyselect.r-lib.org/) 1.2.0 hit CRAN last week and includes a few updates to the syntax of selections in tidyverse functions

Author: Ah no I was confused, I did not know what a "blurb" was ;-)

photo:
  url: https://unsplash.com/photos/xZxZxiceD8s
  author: Laura Gilchrist

# one of: "deep-dive", "learn", "package", "programming", "roundup", or "other"
categories: [package]
tags: [lifecycle, tidyselect]
---

<!--
TODO:
* [ ] Look over / edit the post's title in the yaml
* [ ] Edit (or delete) the description; note this appears in the Twitter card
* [ ] Pick category and tags (see existing with `hugodown::tidy_show_meta()`)
* [ ] Find photo & update yaml metadata
* [ ] Create `thumbnail-sq.jpg`; height and width should be equal
* [ ] Create `thumbnail-wd.jpg`; width should be >5x height
* [ ] `hugodown::use_tidy_thumbnails()`
* [ ] Add intro sentence, e.g. the standard tagline for the package
* [ ] `usethis::use_tidy_thanks()`
-->

[tidyselect](https://tidyselect.r-lib.org/) 1.2.0 hit CRAN last week and includes a few updates to the syntax of selections in tidyverse functions like `dplyr::select(...)` and `tidyr::pivot_longer(cols = )`.

> tidyselect is a low-level package that implements the backend for selection contexts in tidyverse functions. A selection context is an argument like `cols` in `pivot_longer()` or a set of arguments like `...` in `select()` [^1]. In these special contexts, you can use a dialect of R that helps you create a selection of columns. You can select multiple columns with `c()`, a range of columns with `:`, and complex matches with selection helpers such as `starts_with()`. Under the hood, this selection syntax is interpreted and processed by the tidyselect package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tidyselect is a low-level package that provides the backend for selection contexts in tidyverse functions. A selection context is an argument like `cols` in `pivot_longer()` or a set of arguments like `...` in `select()` [^1]. In these special contexts, you can use a domain specific language that helps you create a selection of columns. For example, you can select multiple columns with `c()`, a range of columns with `:`, and complex matches with selection helpers such as `starts_with()`. Under the hood, this selection syntax is interpreted and processed by the tidyselect package.
```

[^1]: If you are wondering whether a particular argument supports selections, look in the function documentation. Arguments tagged with `<tidy-select>` implement the selection dialect. By contrast, arguments tagged with `<data-masking>` only allow to refer to data frame columns directly.

> In this post, we'll cover the most important [lifecycle changes](https://lifecycle.r-lib.org/articles/stages.html) in the selection syntax that tidyverse users should know about. You can see a full list of changes in the [release notes](https://tidyselect.r-lib.org/news/index.html#tidyselect-120). We'll start with a quick recap of what it means in practice for a feature to be deprecated or soft-deprecated.

Reviewer: Maybe emphasise that this blog post is most important if you're writing a package that uses dplyr or tidyr?

```{r setup, message = FALSE}
library(tidyverse)
```

Note: With this release of tidyselect, some error messages will be suboptimal until dplyr 1.1.0 is released (planned in late October). We recommend waiting until then before updating tidyselect (though it's not a big deal if you have already updated).

## About soft-deprecation

Deprecation of features in tidyverse packages is handled by the lifecycle package. See https://www.tidyverse.org/blog/2021/02/lifecycle-1-0-0/ for an introduction.

> The main feature of lifecycle is to distinguish between two stages of deprecation and two usage modes, direct and indirect.

Reviewer: I think you could summarise direct vs indirect by saying something like: "Direct usage is when your code uses the deprecated behaviour; indirect usage is when your code uses someone else's code that uses the deprecated behaviour".

- For script users, __direct usage__ is when you use a deprecated feature from the global environment. If the deprecated feature was used inside a package function that you are calling, it is considered __indirect usage__.

- For package developers, the distinction between direct and indirect usages is made by testthat in unit tests. If a function in your package calls the feature, it is considered direct usage. If that's a function in another package that you are calling, it's indirect usage.

These usage modes determine how verbose (and thus how annoying) the deprecation warnings are.

> - For __soft-deprecation__, indirect usage is always silent because we only want to alert people who are actually able to update code at this point.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For __soft-deprecation__, indirect usage is always silent because we only want to alert people who are actually able to fix the problem.
```

>   Direct usage is one warning every 8 hours to avoid being too annoying during this transition period, so that you can continue to work with existing code, ignore the warnings, and update to the new patterns on your own time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Direct usage only generates one warning every 8 hours to avoid being too annoying during this transition period, so that you can continue to work with existing code, ignore the warnings, and update to the new patterns on your own time.
```

> - For __deprecation__, it's now really time to update the code.  and direct usage gives a warning every time so that deprecated features can no longer be ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For __deprecation__, it's now really time to update the code.  Direct usage gives a warning every time so that deprecated features can no longer be ignored.
```

>   Indirect usage now also warns, but only one warning every 8 hours since indirect users are not in control of the code that uses the deprecated feature. The warning message automatically picks up the package URL where the usage was detected so that you can easily report the deprecation to the relevant maintainers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Indirect usage will now also warn, but only once every 8 hours since indirect users can't fix the problem themselves. The warning message automatically picks up the package URL where the usage was detected so that you can easily report the deprecation to the relevant maintainers.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Probably not in this blog post, but I wonder if it would be helpful to have a table of sorts with the combinations you've described above, e.g.

|                      | **direct usage**         | **indirect usage**                                                |
|----------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **soft-deprecation** | warns once every 8 hours | silent                                                            |
| **deprecation**      | warns every time         | warns once every 8 hours,<br>points to source package for warning |

> lifecycle warnings are set up to helpfully inform you about upcoming changes while being as discrete as possible. All of the features deprecated in tidyselect in this blog post are in the soft-deprecation stage, and will remain this way for at least one year.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
lifecycle warnings are set up to helpfully inform you about upcoming changes while being as discrete as possible. All of the features deprecated in tidyselect in this blog post are in the **soft-deprecation** stage, and will remain this way for at least one year.
```

## Supplying character vectors of column names outside of `all_of()` and `any_of()`

> To select columns from a character vector of names, you normally use `all_of()` or `any_of()`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To specify a column selection using a character vector of names, you normally use `all_of()` or `any_of()`.
```

```{r}
vars <- c("cyl", "am")
mtcars |> select(all_of(vars)) |> glimpse()
```

> Whereas the former is adamant that it _must_ select all of the requested columns:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Whereas `all_of()` is adamant that it _must_ select all of the requested columns:
```

> Whereas `all_of()` is adamant that it _must_ select all of the requested columns:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`all_of()` is adamant that it _must_ select all of the requested columns:
```

```{r, error = TRUE}
mtcars |> select(all_of(letters))
```

> The latter is more lenient and ignores any names that are not present in the data frame. In this case, it ends up selecting nothing:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`any_of()` is more lenient and ignores any names that are not present in the data frame. In this case, it ends up selecting nothing:
```

   The `.data$col` pattern is used to work around this issue: `mtcars |> mutate(.data$am * 2)` doesn't produce any warnings.

Whereas `.data` is very useful in data-masking functions, its usage in selections is much more limited. As we have seen in the previous section, retrieving a variable from character vector should be done with `all_of()`:

```{r}
var <- "am"
mtcars |> select(all_of(var)) |> glimpse()
```

And to avoid the R CMD check note about unknown variables, it is much cleaner to wrap the column name in quotes:

```{r}
mtcars |> select("am") |> glimpse()
```

Allowing the `.data` pronoun in selection contexts also makes the distinction between tidy-selections and data-masking blurrier. And so we have decided to deprecate it in selections:

```{r}
var <- "am"
mtcars |> select(.data[[var]]) |> invisible()
```

```{r}
mtcars |> select(.data$am) |> invisible()
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This deprecation does not affect the use of `.data` in data-masking contexts.
```

Reviewer 2: I realize this is redundant, but I'm just being extra explicit, since this was the source of confusion.

> This deprecation does not affect the use of `.data` in data-masking contexts.

Reviewer 3: Is there some pre-existing list of the main functions in each category (data-masking vs. selection)?

Author: hmm I don't think we have anything like that documented.
